---
title: Earl Grey
tags: tea, tea blends
---

It's time to tackle one of the big ones: Earl Grey. As far as popular flavored
teas go, it's hard to beat Earl Grey. It's a blend of tea that is available
nearly everywhere. Tea drinkers all have their favorite blends and their own
special recipes for preparation. Earl Grey tea distinguishes itself as a blended
tea, typically black, with bergamot, a type of orange from Italy.

Due to the tea's popularity, you'll find it's available as everything from tea
dust in a bag to refined blends of rare leaves requiring delicate
preparation. Many of the mass-produced tea bags are suitable if you're on the go
or in a restaurant without options (though my wife and I often come prepared
with our own), but of the Earl Grey blends I've tried, there are three blends
that left an impression:

**Two Leaves and a Bud** – this blend uses large, full leaf Ceylon tea. Ceylon is a
lighter black tea that works well in blends. The leaves are heavily scented by
the bergamot, nearly veering into the realm of candles and soaps rather than
beverages, but overall it's a solid take on a classic.

**Numi Tea** – Numi's blend is known as “Aged” Earl Grey, blended with very strong
Assam tea. The citrus from the bergamot helps to round out the flavor, but the
strength of the black tea ultimately wins out. It is always my first choice on a
day where I need that extra push to get going, but anyone that prefers lighter
teas may need to add cream or sugar.

**Harney & Sons** – their blend of Earl Grey is intended for the “connoisseur”,
which is not surprising when you see that it's called Earl Grey Supreme. They
want you to know they're not messing around. The black teas are all of extremely
high quality and perfectly blended. Without the bergamot, it would be an
incredible tea. With the bergamot, it's an exemplary tea that I make sure to
keep stocked at all times. It's always a strong choice for breakfast, but also
works nicely as an afternoon tea on cooler days.