---
title: Bach Cello Suites (Casals)
tags: music, baroque, cello
---

J.S. Bach Suites for Cello

![Pablo Casals](/images/casals.jpg "Bach Cello Suites - Casals")

J.S. Bach was an incredibly prolific composer whose works have endured for
centuries. There are over 6,000 recordings of Bach's music by countless artists,
many of whom have dedicated their lives to Bach or the Baroque style. Yet for
some listeners, Bach's music has the reputation of being mathematically perfect
but musically stagnant.

Given the sheer volume of people that play his music, I'm willing to bet a good
portion of those 6,000+ recordings are indeed mechanical and lifeless. It's an
easy trap to fall into when you see how crisp and clean the scores are, how rife
with mathematical patterns and symmetry. But Bach didn't write music to sit on a
page looking pretty. It's up to the artist to breathe life into it, adding
ornamentation and improvisation, creating atmosphere, and infusing the music
with spirit.

One such performer is Pablo Casals, whose legendary 1930's recordings of the
Cello Suites are as profound and invigorating today as they were in his own
time. The digitally remastered two volumes (sold separately) feature the
complete 6 Cello Suites, described in the liner notes as, respectively,
Optimistic, Tragic, Heroic, Grandiose, Tempestuous, and Bucolic. They are works
of poetry, brought to life by Pablo's heartfelt playing and deep understanding
of the music. His melodic phrasing dances and weaves with an energy and beauty
all its own, respectful of the tempo and style, but expressed freely and in the
moment.

The performance is all the more remarkable when you realize that the cello,
often used to play one voice (a one line melody) at a time, is used here to
full-effect playing independent voices. Imagine super-imposing two separate
images upon one another in such a way that both images can be seen with clarity
and independence, yet work together to create a whole, and you'll get a sense of
the magic at work here. If you've ever wondered what all the fuss is about with
Bach, or if you still believe the music is dry and lifeless, spend the next few
minutes of your life tracking down Pablo Casals's Suites for Cello volumes 1 &
2.

