---
title: Five Deadly Talas
tags: music, indian classical
---

[Nada Brahma Music Ensemble](http://www.matthewgrasso.com/nadabrahma.htm)


![The Five Deadly Talas](/images/fivedeadlytalas.jpg "The Five Deadly Talas")

After I began studying classical guitar with Matthew Grasso, I realized we had a
mutual interest in Indian classical music. It is an old, beautiful tradition,
and very different from what we call classical music in the West. Not long after
that, I had a chance to see Matt perform with his group, the Nada Brahma Music
Ensemble, an Indian classical fusion group. And not long after that... I joined
the group.

I was immediately drawn in by the music, and it was the first time I had heard
any type of Indian music played live, fusion or not. I began playing what is
known as the drone guitar. The instrument is an unmodified classical guitar, but
its unique application earned it a new name. The drone guitarist fulfills two
roles: playing the drone notes necessary for Indian classical music (the root
and the 5th, in Western terms), and playing the rhythmic pattern for a given
raga. I play drone on the first two tracks, and Bill Petaishiski plays drone on
the remaining three.

Now that I've completed the disclosure portion of the review, let's get down to
business. The newest phase in the life cycle of the Nada Brahma Music Ensemble
began when Matt joined forces with Alex Jenkins. Alex plays tabla, a traditional
Indian percussion instrument. The group evolved again when Matt conceived the
hybrid 25-string Raga Guitar, built by luthier Scott Richter. I could go on for
several pages about the guitar alone, so for brevity I'll instead recommend
clicking here if you'd like to learn more.

If you're familiar with Indian classical music (either North, South, or both),
this recording is definitely worth your attention. Although the group still has
a “fusion” label, the fusion portion is mostly in the non-traditional
instruments and original ragas and talas, but the feeling of the music is still
very traditional. Speaking in very general terms, raga is a melodic pattern
around which the musicians improvise, and tala is the rhythmic cycle. The
recording is called The Five Deadly Talas partly because it's named after an old
Kung Fu classic, The Five Deadly Venoms, but also because the 5 rhythmic cycles
are deadly if mishandled. Throughout the CD, the ensemble plays in cycles of 10
½, 9 ¼, 5 ½, 4 ¾, and 10 beats.

If you aren't familiar with traditional or fusion Indian music, take some time
out of your day to listen to the samples. The familiarity of guitar strings will
give you a graceful introduction to the classical music of India. I could fill
several posts talking about any single aspect of the performance, including the
amazing tabla solos, the effortless cross rhythms, or the melodic depth of the
Raga Guitar improvisations, but instead I'll end with words of strong
encouragement: go forth and listen!

Samples are available at [CD Baby](http://www.cdbaby.com/),
[Amazon's MP3 Store](http://www.amazon.com/MP3), and
[iTunes](http://www.apple.com/iTunes).

