---
title: A Minor Task
date: 2007-01-28
tags: fiction
metadescription: A very strange story by Chromatic Leaves blogger Eric Rasmussen
---

I
-----

Baramuda was intent on accomplishing something today. Something, or perhaps an
impressive array of nothings that might be catalogued and later reflected upon
as "something" to the uncritical eye. More than anything, he really just wanted
his book back, as he silently resolved never to let anyone borrow anything ever
again.

Certain books held within them an undeniable power: once you'd read them, you
could keep them on your shelf and draw strength from their presence. One such
book, A Fascinating Guide to Normal Behaviour for the Socially Inept, left its
indelible imprint on Baramuda almost immediately. In his enthusiasm to share its
profound insights and wonders with friends, he made the elementary mistake of
voluntarily lending his only copy.

Determined to rectify this critical lapse in judgment, he prepared for the day,
engaging in his normal morning rituals of eating breakfast, showering, brushing
his teeth, and tending to his ferrets. He was a man on a mission, and the day
would not end before he retrieved his most prized possession. Time be damned: it
would just have to stretch and bend as much as necessary to allow for his
success before nightfall.

He picked up the phone and called Nikette to make clear his
intentions. Disappointingly, he only reached her answering machine.  "You've
reached Nikette! I really don't want to talk to anyone right now, or maybe I'm
not even here. You probably shouldn't be calling.  I'd prefer you didn't leave a
message..." The interminable diatribe continued for an eternity, or at least a
solid 90 seconds, before the tone offered a well-earned respite.

Baramuda decided on intimidation as a means to announce his visit. He intoned as
deeply as possible, "NIKETTE. I AM COMING FOR WHAT IS MINE." He paused, debating
whether further elaboration was necessary.  "I mean the book. My whole bookshelf
is in positive disarray without it. It looks empty. I need it back, OK? I'll see
you soon. Thanks." He momentarily regretted his ad-libbed addition to what might
have been a very imposing and ominous message, but reminded himself that either
way he would once again have the obscure treasure in his possession.

The book, which Baramuda had labeled "The Guide" in his usual pragmatic fashion,
was in many ways considered unusual and somewhat suspect. Very few were aware of
its existence, and those that were could never entirely figure out whether it
was a clever parody, some kind of subtle prank, or a work by an individual whose
well-being would enjoy a noticeable improvement once reigned in with proper
medication and a lengthy, mandatory, stay in a suitable place of healing.

The controversy, or heresy, as it was regarded by the pious, was largely based
on the book's opening, which posited the existence of quasi-humans from space
and their unwelcome intrusion into the gene pool. Baramuda suffered from a
particularly debilitating form of social ineptness, and was thus quite eager to
latch onto any explanation for his failings -- even a theory involving
long-traveled spacemen. The Guide's introduction is reprinted here with kind
permission of the author:

<blockquote>
**Introduction: Learning to be human**

*Or, an intricate study of genetic divergence as it relates to social norms*

Have you ever suspected that you are not, in fact, fully human? Your suspicions
may well prove correct! In ancient times, a subset of hominids split from
humanity's ancestors and travelled between the stars for thousands of years
before returning home.

Their great starship civilizations wished for peace, but understood that
humanity was not yet ready to learn of their existence. Having honed their
patience over the centuries, they formed a long term plan: they would slowly
introduce their own genetic material into humanity until the time was right to
come forth and bring about a new age of prosperity for all.

They engaged in selective mating rituals to produce human and quasi-human
hybrids. Careful to avoid detection or arouse suspicion, their extensive
interviewing process tended to favor the inebriated and intellectually deficient
as surrogates. Over time, their DNA garnered a significant foothold, allowing
for the existence of thousands of hybrids worldwide.

These hybrid beings are, by all outward appearances, perfectly normal
humans. The physical differences are completely unnoticeable even to the most
intensive, advanced scientific tests known to man, but the social differences
become apparent very quickly. Ask yourself the following:

*Do you avoid people?*

*Do you frequently find excuses to stay at home and tend to your obscure
 hobbies?*

*Do you have trouble smiling, laughing, or dancing?*

*Are your only friends wary and suspicious of you, keen to derive amusement
from your antics but hesitant to get too close?*

If you answered "yes" to any of the above, you may be harboring DNA borne from
humanity's distant space cousins. Our series of graded lessons will assist you
in mastering successful social interactions and will catch you up to the social
norms for the areas in which you have continued to lag behind. Read on to
discover a new you!
</blockquote>


II
-----

In preparing for his encounter with Nikette, Baramuda thought back to The
Guide's first lesson: Embrace Stupidity. The two words looped in his brain until
they became a personal mantra, readying him for the unexpected. He had learned
through past encounters that there were socially acceptable and unacceptable
ways of dealing with stupidity.  Much to his surprise, launching heavy
projectiles at unwitting offenders was generally deemed to reflect poor taste.

The Guide, however, took things a step beyond the mere toleration of
stupidity. You must learn to live it, breathe it, become it. Baramuda mentally
reviewed the lesson's important points as he drove to Nikette's home. Stupidity
was defined as, "harmful, insensitive, or incomprehensible behaviour perceived
to be the result of conscious, informed decisions instead of the actual
underlying ignorance of action and consequence."

In short, it was all relative, and everyone was bound to be stupid to
someone. The lessons did allow a few minor digressions. You might decide to
recycle, for instance, or publicly criticize large, gas-guzzling motor vehicles,
but going too far would quickly exile you from all but the most obscure fringes
of modern society. The Guide maintained that most importantly, embracing the
human side of your ancestry necessitated acting without any thought of
consequence and learning not to think too deeply (or in some cases, at all)
about more than a handful of important issues.

Nikette lived only a few miles down the street, and Baramuda reached her
quickly. She greeted him enthusiastically. "Oh, it's you. I thought it might
be. Well, come in, I guess." Baramuda obliged. Once inside, he noticed that
Nikette had thoroughly overhauled the layout of her living room. The previously
wide, open spaces and inviting furniture pieces were now charmingly decorated
with assorted styles of unlaundered clothing and food wrappers.

A growing compulsion to clean began to overtake him, but he suppressed it
forcefully. Learn to enjoy it, he thought. "I love what you've done with the
place. Really. It's very modern." He carefully swept aside the pile of pants and
shirts and candy wrappers that now adorned the couch. Once he was certain that
the cushion was free of miscellaneous detritus, noisome stains, or anything
visibly alive, he sat. "So. You know why I've come. I really need my book
back. You've had it for weeks."

Nikette sighed deeply and walked towards a pile in the corner. Each step carried
with it the weight of the entire world; a strained pressure pervaded her every
motion and gesture. With an almost theatrical display of difficulty, she stooped
down and laboriously searched the pile. After a minute, she sharply yelped,
"Hyah!"  Startled, Baramuda rushed to her aid, already picturing a large,
uninvited mammal emerging from the pile to attack his friend. Instead, she
offered him the book. She was standing calmly, her brief enthusiasm at
successfully completing a minor task dampened once more by the unsupportable
density of all existence.

His heart rate slowing, he accepted the proffered guide and began flipping
through it. "Wait a second... there are pages missing. What happened to pages
43-45?" His voice assumed an unnaturally high and hysterical tone as he
continued, "They... they've been torn out! What did you do to my book? What
happened?"

Although Nikette had expected this reaction, she had hoped discovery of the
missing pages would occur outside of her locked home while she remained safely
secured indoors. "I spilled some juice inside when I was reading it. I thought
it might upset you."

"Yes!" he cried. "It upsets me very much! But that doesn't explain why the pages
are gone entirely!"

She took a breath and resumed her explanation. "Well, I knew you'd get mad if
you saw the stains. I didn't want you to get mad. The juice wouldn't come
out. So I took out the pages instead."

Baramuda paused to consider her logic. An endlessly branching tree of
possibilities flowed out before him. His first impulse was to grab the nearest
heavy object and toss it in Nikette's direction, but past experience had long
since subdued his most violent tendencies. He considered yelling, or crying, or
giving himself over to the impending breakdown he had barely kept at bay for
years.

He looked down to the book for guidance. What would a normal person do? And then
he remembered: Embrace Stupidity, lesson one. He was over-thinking the entire
matter. What was the use in questioning her actions? She was only trying to
help. In a moment of inspired normality, he briefly hugged her, thanked her, and
left without another word.


III
-----

During the drive home, Baramuda grossly violated the tenets of his sacred
guide. He mentally replayed the scenario with Nikette over and over, imagining
hundreds of different outcomes. He strove desperately to find meaning in the
encounter: had he acted normally? Would this benefit him socially? Would
society's collective consciousness pick up on his newfound harmonious and
blissfully ignorant qualities?

The Guide, although very clear in describing the steps one must take for social
success, provided no answers to his questions, and he was incapable of giving up
completely on thought. Surely there really was a benefit to thinking and
thinking and thinking. He wondered at how anyone could truly manage
self-improvement in the absence of conscious intervention.

Not for the first time, he placed an inadvisable measure of faith in the idea
that he was not entirely human. On that point, if nothing else, he believed The
Guide had the right idea. Maybe he was born with an abnormal disorder that had
so far escaped discovery, or maybe he did have a distant ancestor from
space. But if The Guide was correct, why did it try to pacify the people who
were ultimately destined to bring about great change?

Arriving home, full of unanswered questions and fruitlessly struggling for a
deeper meaning, he found solace in feeding his ferrets. He carefully placed The
Guide on his bookshelf, and decided that even the smallest accomplishments held
some significance.

The day's events had opened him to a myriad of new ideas, and he began again to
feel that curious childlike acceptance of mysteries and the unknown. He didn't
need all of the answers. He didn't need The Guide.  There was more to this
planet, this galaxy, this existence, than he could ever learn in a thousand
lifetimes.

As night fell, he went to the backyard and stared intently into the sky. Far up
among the stars, the briefest flicker of light, unimaginably distant, seemed to
wink in his direction.
