---
title: A Really Neat Costume
date: 2004-07-30
tags: humor, fiction
metadescription: Learn why having a neat costume is important from Eric Rasmussen of Chromatic Leaves
---

It has been my understanding that, sooner or later, people die. Bad things
happen. Good people don't get what they deserve. I deal with this constantly in
real life, and fantasy is supposed to be my escape from the world's evils. But
somewhere along the line I started getting into movies and books where tragedies
are common place, and a good day involves not losing a limb to flesh-eating
insects or drug infection. To compensate, I've invented a fantasy world within
the fantasies I enjoy. It's a fantasy where I have the power to influence events
and make the world happy again.

I've always wanted to be a hero, without having to work at it. Training,
discipline, studying the criminal underworld, these are things best left to
professionals. I just want to make a cool costume and get all the credit a great
hero deserves. When I'm reading fantastic stories, and things start to go wrong,
I imagine myself stepping in to right them. A protagonist is falsely accused and
imprisoned? No problem! I'm the guy who'll show up and convince everyone that
she's not guilty at all, and then I'll tie up all of the villains and save the
world. The reason I'm not a hero is I have no idea how to foil the bad guys'
master plans. Children don't find my physical demeanor imposing... much less
hardened criminals. And even if I was threatening to look at, I'd have no power
to back up my threats.

You see, out of all the wonderful things heroes do, the only one I excel at is
explaining everything that's going on. I dream of stepping into a fictional
world, and just before innocents are betrayed and slaughtered. I can expose the
evildoers and spend several hours telling everyone how clever I am, stopping
only to pose for the press. Everyone would love me, if only for the really cool
costume and impeccable timing. I'd always pop in at the exact right
moment. "Don't shake his hand," I'd shout, just in time, "he's concealing a vial
of poison!" Everyone would look at me, bewildered. More bemused, at first, than
accepting of my critical intervention, but soon enough my stylish costume and
uncanny knowledge of events would win their trust.

And if the traitor tries to bolt or take me down, well, I'll figure something
out. I can always travel backwards in time and do it over if something goes
wrong - that's the beauty of being an imaginary hero in an already imaginary
world. Logic applies less as the number of paradoxical worlds converging on each
other increases. It's some kind of law of physics, I think. Even if events do
take a turn for the worse, they're bound to end up better than they would have
otherwise. So the villain escapes by hacking down a few people who block his
way: at least I saved the protagonist from poison! Imagine the headlines, the
photos of us, side by side, covering the front page and inspiring awe in
millions. After all, in fantasy, it doesn't matter how many people die as long
as they aren't main characters. The nameless masses are fodder for the cannons,
grist for the mill, and... well, I was never very good at those sorts of
sayings.

It's not likely that I'll ever amount to much of a hero. My useful skills
include, honestly, making balloon animals (with enough time, directions, and a
ruler of appropriate length), and magically making "broken" computers work by
plugging them in and depressing the "power" button, or putting paper back in the
printer. Even then, I'm quick to dispense an hour or so worth of sage advice:
your friendly neighborhood computer whiz, costumeless, unpaid, but possessing an
intimidating amount knowledge. "The trick," I'd say, "is pressing the power
button *after* plugging it in."

But maybe being a hero isn't such a great thing after all. It never feels too
satisfying in my fantasy within fantasy. The characters are appreciative, but
only because I make them so. Sure, my costume is cool as they come, but what do
already fictional characters care? It's depressing when you realize you can't
even impress fantasy versions of real people. It's not as easy as it sounds. I
try to picture saving a bus full of school children and being embraced by
Kirsten Dunst for sacrificing my own safety to protect some ungrateful brats,
but it doesn't work. She can't even make an appreciably realistic cameo in my
fantasies; contractual obligation, I lie to myself. I'm left to find some small
comfort in that fact that, on some, arguably insignificant, level, I can make
the world a better place to live, even if it's only in dreams.
