---
title: Bartók String Quartets
date: 2010-08-22
tags: music, modern era, quartet
metadescription: Explore the eerie world of Bartok's String Quartets as interpreted by the Hungarian String Quartet.
---

Bartók: 6 String Quartets

![Hungarian String Quartet (2-disc)](/images/bartokquartets.jpg "Bartók: 6 String Quartets")

If my commentary below conveys to you one thing, I sincerely hope it is this:
beware Bartók.

It may seem a strange warning for a work that is so highly regarded among
musicians. What is there to be afraid of, you ask? I find it difficult to
quantify. I do not have the technical language to convey to you the subtleties
and nuances in the way the quartet instruments are used, and nor can I tell you
how or why it is often considered the most important string quartet cycle since
the 19th century. But what I can tell you, unequivocally, is this is no work to
be trifled with. Bartók effortlessly speaks a language all his own, at once
coherent and mad, and being too close to this level of raw artistic power is
akin to flying too close to the sun.

The movements do not portray moods in the traditional Western sense. The musical
language is far removed from the classical and romantic works that precede
it. The discordant and unexpected harmonies are so fully brought to life by the
Hungarian String Quartet that you will find yourself quickly traveling down the
rabbit hole into a land of wonder and terror. The constant dissonance gives the
music oppressive qualities, but it is often mixed with rising melodies that may
not convey joy, but nor do they lament. The overall effect is of visiting an
unfamiliar place, being out of your element and unsure of what's around the
corner. You remind yourself that many others have made the journey and came out
unscathed, but you can't help but wonder if you will be the one that doesn't
make it back.

Bartók's compositions are striking in the way of surreal art, where you feel as
if you are teetering between madness and brilliance, peering too deeply inside
the mind of the artist. However, the strong feelings I have would not be
possible without the passionate playing of the Hungarian String Quartet. I could
say all the usual things about their musical abilities, but what stands out most
is their intimacy with the underlying musical ideas. After hearing this
recording, I cannot imagine hearing the pieces played any other way. For those
who value artistic expression above all else, I highly recommend tracking down a
copy of this CD. It's not widely available, but at the time of this writing can
still be purchased through Arkiv Music.

