---
title: Nigel North - Baroque Lute
date: 2010-09-29
tags: music, baroque, lute
metadescription: Eric Rasmussen reviews Nigel North's spectacular Baroque Lute recording.
---

![](/images/nigel.jpg "Nigel North - Baroque Lute")

As a guitarist, I have always felt closely attuned to the sounds of stringed
instruments, the harmonic vibrations sometimes bearing a close resemblance to
our own vocal chords. But as an avid classical guitarist, I'd grown used to
guitar arrangements of pieces that were originally played on very different
instruments. When I first came across Nigel North's Baroque Lute CD, I was
hesitant to hear again many pieces I had heard countless times on guitar. My
prior experience with the pieces left me completely unprepared for the
additional depth and richness offered by a 13-course (13-string) D-minor lute.

The lute's many open bass strings allow the player to pluck fully developed bass
lines entirely on open strings while being free to move around the fretboard for
the melody. The unique tuning also lends itself to smaller intervals that don't
always work well on guitar. Although it seems odd to compare how a lute holds up
next to a guitar, given the lute came first, the lute has not enjoyed the same
level of popularity in recent centuries. Happily, Nigel North's Baroque Lute
provides the only introduction you will need to learn what the lute has to
offer.

The playlist opens with a fully developed sonata by Weiss. Listen closely to the
counterpoint as the bass lines effortlessly echo and dance around the
melody. Weiss's music leads to the almost catchy Concerto in F Major by Vivaldi,
which is playful, well-paced, and light, eventually transitioning into Weiss's
much darker Tombeau for Count Logy, a nearly impressionistic baroque piece
lamenting the death of a famous musician. Nigel North's musicality continues to
shine throughout the performances and ends with his own arrangement of the
ever-epic Chaconne by Bach, played here at remarkable speed, but with a strong
voice that makes every melody distinct.

Where I might normally recommend a particular composer or set of works,
independent of the artists involved, here I give my highest recommendation to
Nigel North and his artistry. His carefully chosen selection of works and
undeniable talent make this an unforgettable recording. I have rarely heard the
baroque style evoked so fully across more than an hour of selected works, the
full range of the lute brought forth in style with equally strong bass lines and
melodies, creative ornamentation on repeats, and a personal touch that gives the
works new life.
