---
title: Rachmaninov's 2nd
date: 2010-02-07
tags: music, romantic-era, symphony
metadescription: Eric Rasmussen explains why your life is incomplete if you don't listen to Rachmaninov's 2nd Symphony.
---

Orchestra: Sinfonia Varsovia, conducted by Jose Cura

Recording: Sergei Rachmaninov: Symphony No. 2 (complete version)

![](/images/rachmaninov2nd.jpg "Rachmaninov's 2nd")

When it comes to writing reviews of classical works, you may choose to focus on
the history of the work itself, the composer, or the orchestra. When it comes to
writing a review of Rachmaninov’s 2nd Symphony, however, my interest lies in the
music listening experience itself. Let’s leave the details to the professional
critics, and focus on the question: what can Rachmaninov do for you?

The real magic of the 2nd Symphony is it becomes a part of you, inseparable from
the feelings and emotions you experienced during the period you listened to it
most. The work can quickly become the soundtrack to your life. From the haunting
opening to the energetic second movement, the longing, inspiration, and eventual
triumph of the third, or the all out fanfare of the fourth, each minute of the
music is rich with complex emotions.

In particular, the third movement saw me through a difficult period. The music’s
melancholy but hopeful qualities were perfectly in sync with the emotions I felt
during an uncertain time in my life, and for me the music holds the fondness and
nostalgia of remembering a trying time that led to great things.

The recording and performance quality of this version is excellent, but copy
protection makes it difficult to play on Apple computers. I recommend visiting
Arkiv Music to learn about different recordings. I also highly recommend Matthew
Grasso’s Music for the Extended 7-String Guitar, which features the entire 3rd
movement on solo guitar. Hearing it played so personally lends it an even more
poignant emotional quality that can’t be missed.

